JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening. I'm
Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: What
if there's
a contested convention? What
might happen
if no Republican candidate wins
enough delegates
before the July gathering in
Cleveland?
Then: how a community college in
New York
City is also paying student book
fees and
transportation costs to double
graduation
rates.
And we go to Denmark to see if
it lives up
to the title happiest place on
earth.
SARAH EGESKOV, Attorney: I don't
think we
ever thought about anything evil
or threatening
through our childhoods, and I
hope we can
give the same to our daughters.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: The day's major
headline in
the presidential race came far
from the campaign's
front lines. As the candidates
stumped for
votes, the spotlight shifted to
a man who
insisted he won't join the hunt,
now or later.
REP. PAUL RYAN (R-WI), Speaker
of the House:
I do not want, nor will I will
accept the
nomination for our party.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The declaration
came from House
Speaker Paul Ryan in Washington:
He said he's
not looking to be president
under any circumstances.
REP. PAUL RYAN: Count me out.
I simply believe that if you
want to be the
nominee for our party, to be the
president,
you should actually run for it.
I chose not
to do this. Therefore, I should
not be considered,
period, end of story.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Even that may not
end the talk
of turning to Ryan, especially
with a contested
convention looking likelier all
the time.
In Upstate New York today,
front-running Donald
Trump pressed to make sure it
doesn't come
to that, first by winning New
York state's
GOP primary next week, where new
polls show
him with a wide lead. Trump is
also keeping
up his running criticism of
delegate selection,
charging the process is rigged,
and that rival
Ted Cruz is stealing delegates
that are rightfully
his.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
I have millions of votes more,
but I also
have hundreds of delegates more,
but that's
not the same thing to me. I
think the vote
is the thing that you count.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In turn, the
Texas senator
says he's simply better
organized than Trump
and, in a radio interview today,
predicted
a grassroots tsunami will send
him to victory
at the convention.
SEN. TED CRUZ (R-TX),
Presidential Candidate:
We're seeing people who love
this country
coming out, and they're crawling
over broken
glass. It's not for me. It's not
about me.
It's about the country. It's
about the Constitution.
JUDY WOODRUFF: For now, Trump
leads Cruz by
about 200 delegates, with John
Kasich well
back in the count. But in New
York City today,
the Ohio governor warned
Republicans, in a
clear reference to Trump.
GOV. JOHN KASICH (R-OH),
Presidential Candidate:
Some feed off of the fears and
anger that
is felt by some of us and
exploit it feed
their own insatiable desires for
fame or attention.
That could drive America down
into a ditch
and not make us great again.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Democrat Bernie
Sanders also
took on the Republican
front-runner at a rally
in Rochester.
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS (VT-I),
Presidential Candidate:
When we stand together and we
don't let the
Trumps of the world divide us
up, when we
stand together, there is nothing
that we cannot
accomplish.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Hillary Clinton,
meanwhile,
campaigned in New York City,
with a pitch
for equal pay for women.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
I'm very proud that New York and
California
have raised the minimum wage,
because nearly
two-thirds of minimum wage
workers are women.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Back in
Washington, President
Obama appeared to boost Clinton
at a new museum
on women's equality. He said he
wants future
generations to be astonished
there was a time
when a woman had never been
president.
In the day's other news: North
Carolina's
governor moved to ease or change
parts of
a new law on gay, lesbian and
transgender
rights. Pat McCrory ordered
protections for
state employees based on sexual
orientation
and gender. And he asked North
Carolina lawmakers
to restore the right to sue over
discrimination.
He said it shows he's listening.
confusion, passion and, frankly,
selective
outrage and hypocrisy,
especially against
the great state of North
Carolina. But, based
upon this feedback, I am taking
action to
affirm the state's commitment to
privacy and
equality.
JUDY WOODRUFF: McCrory still
supports a ban
on letting transgender people
select public
bathrooms based on gender
identity. The law
has led to several major
corporations canceling
expansion plans in the state.
In Afghanistan, the Taliban
launched a spring
offensive, and warned of
large-scale suicide
bombings and assassinations.
Hours earlier,
the U.S. Embassy in Kabul issued
an emergency
warning to Americans. It cited a
plot to attack
a major hotel in the capital.
Police in Belgium have charged
two more men
in connection with the Brussels
bombings.
They allegedly helped rent an
apartment for
one of the attackers who killed
32 people
last month. Prosecutors also
announced three
new arrests linked to November's
attacks in
Paris.
A new warning today about the
world economy.
In Washington, the International
Monetary
Fund downgraded its forecast for
growth this
year again, the new target, 3.2
percent.
MAURICE OBSTFELD, International
Monetary Fund:
Global growth continues, but at
an increasingly
disappointing pace that leaves
the world economy
more exposed to negative risks.
Growth has
been too slow for too long.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Despite that
report, Wall Street
surged higher, as a jump in oil
prices lifted
energy stocks. The Dow Jones
industrial average
gained nearly 165 points to
close at 17721.
The Nasdaq rose 38 points, and
the S&P 500
added 19.
A measure of help may be on the
way for the
nation's bees. Garden care giant
Ortho announced
today it will stop using
chemicals known as
neonicotinoids by 2021. They
attack insects'
nervous system, but it's widely
believed they
have also helped to cause a
dramatic decline
in the bee population. Other
companies are
considering ending their use as
well.
And Russian billionaire investor
Yuri Milner
pledged $100 million today to
send tiny spaceships
to the stars. The goal is to
hunt for life
in the Alpha Centauri. That's
the star system
closest to our solar system.
Each probe will
have a so-called light sail.
They will capture
energy from lasers on Earth and
could travel
at one-fifth the speed of light,
far faster
than any current craft.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
the possibilities
around a contested Republican
Convention;
the last of the big banks
settles over the
financial crisis -- is it still
too big to
fail?; a trip to the happiest
nation on earth;
and much more.
And we begin with politics
tonight.
As we just heard, the race for
the White House
is partly a battle for
delegates, and neither
party has a candidate with
enough delegates
yet to clinch the nomination.
Democrats Hillary
Clinton and Bernie Sanders are
within a few
hundred pledged delegates of one
another.
But add in superdelegates, and
she has a commanding
lead.
For Republicans, Donald Trump
leads the delegate
count, with Ted Cruz a few
hundred behind,
and John Kasich well back. The
GOP still has
contests too come in 16 states,
including
New York, Pennsylvania, and
California.
For more on the Republican
delegate dance,
we're joined by Ben Ginsberg.
He's a partner
in the law firm Jones Day, an
NBC/MSNBC political
analyst, and he served as
general counsel
on Mitt Romney's 2012 campaign.
And, Ben Ginsberg, welcome to
the "NewsHour."
BENJAMIN GINSBERG, Former Mitt
Romney General
Counsel: Thank you. Thank you
for having me.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, let's remind
everybody
first that this delegate process
has two different
steps to it.
BENJAMIN GINSBERG: It does.
The first is the primaries that
we have all
been following on Tuesday nights
and Saturday
afternoons, where candidates vie
to get percentages
of the vote. And the second part
is the delegate
selection process, which is now
going on in
state conventions and before
state executive
committees around the country.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, what's
happening now is
that, after the number of
delegates is chosen
based on how well these
candidates do, decisions
have to be made about who the
people are that
fill those slots. And you were
telling us
earlier it is different in
virtually every
state in how that's done.
BENJAMIN GINSBERG: It is.
Republicans practice a fierce
federalism,
which allows each state to do it
the way that
state wants to, and you have a
variety of
mechanisms for selecting who
will be the actual
people on the floor in
Cleveland.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And how are those
decisions
made? A lot of it is personal
relationships,
you were saying. Some of it is
who is already
in the party hierarchy in a
particular state.
BENJAMIN GINSBERG: Yes.
If it's a state convention, then
it's a matter
of the candidates getting enough
of their
supporters there to win their
slate of delegates.
There are other states where a
state executive
committee, in other words, the
leaders of
the state, will determine who
the delegates
are.
That's an instance of taking
care of your
political supporters and maybe
your friends
and family. There are a few
states about 10
percent of the delegates are
chosen directly
by the candidates, but in most
instances,
the delegates are not chosen
directly by the
candidates.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And right now, as
we have reported,
Donald Trump is a couple hundred
delegates
ahead, but Ted Cruz seems to be
picking off
delegates here and there. What
is he doing
that Mr. Trump isn't?
BENJAMIN GINSBERG: Well, the
very granular
process of winning state
conventions is what
he seems to have concentrated a
great deal
on.
So, the way Republicans do it is
that there
are often county conventions and
then district
conventions and then a state
convention. And
so it's a process of getting
your supporters
in each one of those, and,
ultimately, that's
how you get people in Cleveland.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now, the ideal
solution for
any candidate is to get to the
magic number
1,237 before Cleveland. Donald
Trump still
has a chance to do that, right?
BENJAMIN GINSBERG: Yes. Yes. If
he wins about
60 percent of the delegates who
are remaining,
perhaps 66 percent of the
delegates who will
be bound to a particular
candidate, he can
do that on the first ballot.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But if he
doesn't, what are
the options then?
BENJAMIN GINSBERG: Well, the
options are about
70 percent of the delegates will
become unbound
for a second ballot. So, it's...
JUDY WOODRUFF: So they're no
longer committed
to voting.
BENJAMIN GINSBERG: To either Mr.
Trump or
Mr. Cruz or Mr. Kasich or Mr.
Rubio or Bush
or Carson or any of the
candidates, correct.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And that means
that it then
goes on to several -- to ballots
after that,
and what could happen?
BENJAMIN GINSBERG: Well, a
number of things
can happen.
The convention can come to a
decision on one
of the candidates, Mr. Trump or
Mr. Cruz.
It is possible that additional
individuals
can get their names put in
nomination further
down the road. There is a
process for doing
that. Much of this will actually
be determined,
these rules of the road, by the
convention
rules committee meeting on
probably the Friday
before the convention starts.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So for us to be
talking about
it now, can we really know right
now what's
going to happen?
BENJAMIN GINSBERG: No, I don't
think so.
On June 8, the day after the
last primaries,
there will be a pretty set way
to know what
the first ballot vote will be
like. And then
there will be rules decisions
made by delegates
who have not yet even been
selected that will
impact the way the proceedings
of the convention
go.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What a lot of
people are talking
about, Ben Ginsberg, is if
Donald Trump is
close, but not there, if he's
say at 1,100,
rather than 1,237, what happens
in that situation?
BENJAMIN GINSBERG: Well, there
are a number
of delegates who are unbound,
somewhere between
160 and 200 probably, who are
not bound to
a candidate.
JUDY WOODRUFF: At any point? You
mean going
into the convention.
BENJAMIN GINSBERG: At any point.
At any point.
Their states follow specific
rules. So there
will be 40 days of wooing as
those unbound
delegates get entreaties from
many a candidate.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Entreaties,
meaning?
BENJAMIN GINSBERG: Well, they
will have conversations
about how the candidates are
best qualified
to do it. There might be some
sightseeing
around the country.
Gerald Ford in 1976 took people
on rides on
Air Force One. So there are any
number of
ways to develop a relationship
with those
delegates.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But if you're a
delegate right
now who is not bound to anybody,
you're a
pretty popular guy or girl.
BENJAMIN GINSBERG: I think
you're very popular,
and your popularity may only
increase.
You're either going to have a
lot of currency
on June 8 to July 18, or you
will you will
be, gee, it was so close.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Prediction, Ben
Ginsberg, on
how much suspense there is going
to be going
into this convention?
BENJAMIN GINSBERG: Well, again,
we will know
that on June the 8th, after the
June 7 primaries
are done.
I think there will be a lot of
maneuvering.
This will be an historically
close delegate
count, one way or another, and
the rules fights
in the week before the
convention can actually
have a determining effect on the
outcome the
following week.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All eyes on
Cleveland.
BENJAMIN GINSBERG: Yes, indeed.
JUDY WOODRUFF: No doubt about
it.
Ben, Ben Ginsberg, it's great to
see you.
Thank you.
BENJAMIN GINSBERG: Thanks, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now to our
occasional series
of conversations about whether
some banks
and firms are too big to fail,
and whether
they pose a risk to the
country's financial
health.
John Yang has our latest
installment.
JOHN YANG: Eight years after the
housing bubble
exploded, investment bank
Goldman Sachs this
week became the last big
institution to settle
with the government for its role
in selling
bundles of bad loans to
investors, which led
to the financial crisis.
In this election year, there is
a lot of talk
about whether too many firms
remain too big
to fail and whether the
Dodd-Frank law is
working.
Lynn Stout is a Cornell
University law professor
who now serves on the Treasury
Department's
Financial Research Advisory
Committee. She
has been very critical of
Dodd-Frank, and
she joins us now from Ithaca,
New York.
Professor Stout, thanks for
being with us.
Let's start off with that
Goldman Sachs settlement
this week. They have agreed to
pay as much
as $5 billion in this settlement
with the
government. What does this say
about accountability
now among the big financial
institutions after
the financial crisis?
LYNN STOUT, Cornell University:
I'm afraid
the settlement confirms
something that we
have suspected for quite a long
time, which
is that it looks like fraudulent
practices
were hard-baked into the banking
sector during
2008.
And, unfortunately, although $5
billion sounds
like a lot of money, the
settlement is actually
relatively small. It's certainly
small compared
to the damage that was done by
these fraudulent
practices, and it's relatively
small compared
to some of the settlements by
some of the
other banks, by Citibank and by
Bank of America.
So, as large as the figure may
seem, I'm afraid
it creates the risk that this
could be business
as usual, that, at the end of
the day, Goldman
Sachs may have found these sorts
of fraudulent
practices to overall profitable,
even in light
of the fines.
JOHN YANG: Business as usual,
you say.
Now, Dodd-Frank was supposed to
address all
this. It was the response to all
of this,
the financial crisis and what
brought it on.
You say Dodd-Frank isn't
working. Why not?
What about it isn't working?
LYNN STOUT: The basic problem
with Dodd-Frank
is that it created the
appearance of Congress
doing something, without that
appearance being
backed up by reality.
What the Dodd-Frank Act did
mostly was direct
various regulators at the
Federal Reserve,
the FTC, the CFTC to draft
regulations that
were supposed to rein in the
banks. But Dodd-Frank
itself doesn't impose many hard
and fast rules,
and what's happened in all the
years since
is that the financial industry,
through lobbying,
campaign contributions,
behind-the-scene actions,
HAS been very effective at
stymying regulators
from doing anything that really
crimps their
style and reins them in.
JOHN YANG: Well, the banks say
that they are,
they are being reined in. The
banks say that
their profits are down, that
Dodd-Frank has
changed the way they do
business. They're
holding more capital, they say.
They're being
more closely regulated. There
are things they
can and they can't do.
And, as I say, it's cutting into
their profits,
they say. What do you say to
that?
LYNN STOUT: Well, it's true that
bank profits
are down, but I think we need to
be realistic.
One of the primary reasons is
that the banks
basically lost the faith of
their customers.
They damaged their own
reputations and destroyed
much of their own customer base.
Now, some
regulation does play a role. And
right now,
regulators are watching the
banks pretty closely,
but the rules are still pretty
flexible.
And we have to be concerned that
in years
that are coming in the future,
the regulators
are going to take their eye off
the ball and
we will be back to some of the
same problems
in terms of concentrations of
risk and highly
speculative activity that led to
the 2008
collapse in the first place.
JOHN YANG: What do you think
should be done?
LYNN STOUT: It's actually very
straightforward.
Up until around the year 2000,
we had a bunch
of banking regulations in place,
including
Glass-Steagall and rules against
speculative
derivatives trading that had
proven time-tested
at keeping banks from taking on
excessive
risks and had been very
effective at keeping
the financial sector stable and
sound.
And most of those laws were
eliminated in
a -- what's turned out to be a
very misbegotten
profit of so-called
deregulation. I think
that if we put those rules back
in place,
experience and history suggest
there's no
reason why we can't have a safe,
sound banking
sector.
It's just very hard without some
of the original
regulatory firewalls we used to
have.
JOHN YANG: Glass-Steagall came
out of the
Depression and said you couldn't
-- you couldn't
-- had to separate commercial
banking and
investment banking.
The critics of that, of your
assessment, say
that a lot of what happened in
the financial
crisis had nothing to do with
that. It had
to do with a pure investment
bank like Goldman
Sachs. It had to do not with the
mixing of
the two. What's your response?
LYNN STOUT: Oh, that's true, to
some extent,
but Glass-Steagall wasn't the
only rule that
was changed.
We also legalized
over-the-counter derivatives
for the first time, and we even
gave a derivatives
contracts priority in
bankruptcy. There were
lots and lots of financial rules
that were
changed in favor of the
financial industry
through a steady process of the
application
of campaign contributions and
lobbying power.
And if we're going to have a
stable system,
I think we need to find a way to
get past
this problem of lack of a
political will to
effectively regulate financial
institutions.
JOHN YANG: We had Barney Frank
on in one of
our conversations about this,
the Barney Frank
of Dodd-Frank.
And he said that even if an
institution were
to get into trouble, that the
way the law
is now, there would be no
government bailout,
no propping up of an
institution, it would
have to fail, and that whatever
government
funds would be spent would be
spent on letting
it dissolve in an orderly
fashion, so it wouldn't
cause a big financial problem to
the rest
of the economy, and that any
money the government
spent would have to be
recovered.
Your response.
LYNN STOUT: I think that's,
shall we say,
an extremely optimistic view.
And I think history has shown
that the ties
between the big financial
institutions and
Washington are so tight that the
financial
institutions are very good at
engineering
taxpayer-financed bailouts.
JOHN YANG: Lynn Stout, thanks
for joining
us. Thank you very much.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": a
New York City
program that promises to double
community
college graduation rates; the
highest glass
ceiling, a look at the women who
aspired to
be president; and why
politicians need to
do less talking and more
listening.
But, first: Universal health
care, free university
education, and generous
unemployment benefits,
are these the keys to happiness?
They are
all offered in Denmark, the
Nordic country
Democratic presidential hopeful
Bernie Sanders
says the United States should
look to as a
model.
Once again this year, Denmark
tops a United
Nations poll as the happiest
nation on earth.
But is this really true?
From Copenhagen, special
correspondent Malcolm
Brabant investigates.
MALCOLM BRABANT: A happy
accident of geography:
being born in a country whose
safety net offers
protection from cradle to grave.
SARAH EGESKOV, Attorney: On a
day like this,
it's obvious we are gathered
with our friends
and family to celebrate this
little baby,
so it's a wonderful day. And in
the bigger
picture, we live in a great
society with a
health care system and free
education.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Christening
their daughter
Kaya (ph), attorney Sarah
Egeskov and her
partner, Claes, hope their state
of bliss
will leap a generation.
CLAES RASMUSSEN, Financial
Adviser: We try
to give her some of the same
values that we
have today and hope for her that
she will
have the same freedom of speech
and freedom
of beliefs.
SARAH EGESKOV: And a safe
childhood.
CLAES RASMUSSEN: Yes.
SARAH EGESKOV: I don't think we
thought about
anything evil or threatening
through our childhoods,
and I hope we can give the same
to our daughters.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Pastor Pernille
Oestrem's
church is in Copenhagen's most
racially diverse
district. She worries that some
of her immigrant
parishioners do not enjoy the
same level of
happiness as ethnic Danes, and
she regards
it as her mission to try to
spread the joy.
PERNILLE OESTREM, Pastor: We
don't have any
wars and the crime is low. And
we can let
our children walk to school in
the morning
by themselves when they're quite
young. We
don't have to drive them because
of drive-by
shootings or something like
that. That means
a lot, that we think we're going
to be 90
and have
great-great-great-grandchildren.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Danes pay more
income tax
than any other nationality, earn
over $55,000,
and the tax rate hits more than
60 percent,
but, according to happiness
expert Meik Wiking,
Danes don't mind.
MEIK WIKING, Happiness Expert:
Just take free
access to health care, free
access to university
education, quite generous
benefits if you
lose your job. Just those three
things mean
that a lot of people around the
world, if
they don't have access to them,
will experience
unhappiness. And since the
welfare state takes
care of that, we increase the
bottom.
MALCOLM BRABANT: What about the
high levels
of taxes that people have to
pay?
MEIK WIKING: Well it's true,
it's really high
levels. But I think what's more
interesting
is that the really high level of
support for
the for high taxes. If you ask
Danes, are
you happily paying your taxes,
nine out of
10 will say yes.
MALCOLM BRABANT: It's just after
2:00 in the
afternoon and some of
Copenhagen's bicycling
commuters are already heading
home. The average
Dane only works a 35-hour week,
and enjoys
five weeks annual paid leave, on
top of public
holidays, not to mention
generous maternity
and paternity leave.
According to yet another survey,
it has the
best work-life balance in the
developed world,
which is a source of pride for
union leader
Nana Hojlund.
NANA HOJLUND, Union Leader:
Work-life balance
means a lot to the Danish people
when it comes
to happiness, because it's a way
that you
can both have a really good job,
and you can
spend hours on your job, and you
can also
have a family.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Not everyone
swallows the
concept of perfect little
Denmark. British
author Michael Booth has lived
here for 15
years, and his book debunking
the Scandinavian
myths is a bestseller.
MICHAEL BOOTH, Author, "The
Almost Nearly
Perfect People": I know the
institutes and
the researchers like to use that
word because
it grabs headlines around the
world. I don't
think the Danes are happy. I
think they're
more satisfied. They're a pretty
somber, dour
people. They complain quite a
lot.
But when you ask them, are you
happy, what
they really mean is, well, we're
content.
Things function here. It's safe.
We have a
safety net. We don't worry that
much. And
the difference between the rich
and the poor
means that you don't have this
kind of society
of envy that you might have
elsewhere in the
world.
MALCOLM BRABANT: According to
the United Nations,
Burundi is the unhappiest
country on the planet,
followed closely by Syria. The
United States
is in 13th in the happiness
league, just behind
Israel and Austria.
Now, according to Bernie
Sanders, the U.S.
would be a much better place if
it emulated
cycle-crazy Denmark. But the
center-right
Danish prime minister has
rejected suggestions
that this is some sort of
socialist utopia,
but he's happy that Denmark's
welfare system
is being looked at as something
to aim for.
According to Danish experts,
Scandinavians
have a genetic predisposition
towards happiness.
Americans with Scandinavian
heritage share
those particular traits. Could
the Danish
model be transported across the
Atlantic if
the U.S. chose to change the
guard?
MEIK WIKING: The same things
that drive happiness
in Scandinavia are the same
things that drive
happiness in the U.S. So I think
there are
some things we could export.
MALCOLM BRABANT: So what would
you have to
export?
MEIK WIKING: I think what I
would do would
be to focus on the bottom half
of the population
to increase the bottom by
installing a welfare
system inspired by the Nordic
countries.
MALCOLM BRABANT: One uniquely
Scandinavian
social phenomenon that would be
difficult
to export is what's called the
Jantelov, an
unwritten code of conformity
that decries
displays of ostentation or
wealth and people
who try to rise above their
allotted station
in life.
MICHAEL BOOTH: How does that sit
with Americans
and the American dream? Not so
well. There's
no simple template that could be
imposed on
America. It doesn't take much to
make a happy
Dane. Light a fire, light some
candles, open
a bottle of red wine, and you
have got a happy
Dane.
I think Americans are a little
more demanding
when it comes to their
happiness. It's enshrined,
you know, in the Constitution.
They're entitled
to it. But they have much bigger
ideas of
what constitutes happiness. So,
can you take
it? Will Americans pay 56
percent income tax?
I doubt it.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Pastor Pernille
Oestrem believes
a lack of realism enables the
Danes to be
so upbeat. But she is acutely
aware that,
along with the rest of Europe,
Denmark is
a potential target for Islamic
State. So how
does she manage to maintain
happiness in a
time of terror?
PERNILLE OESTREM: Maybe the
children that
I baptize during this time are
actually inheriting
a society that looks a lot like
the society
when I was young. There was a
nuclear scare.
I didn't know if tomorrow was
going to come,
but we still went out to play
and had our
fights and got home to have
dinner.
MALCOLM BRABANT: So, there's the
perfect advice.
Keep calm and carry on. It's
just easier if
you're Danish. It's in their
genes.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Malcolm Brabant
in Copenhagen.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The Obama
administration has
long touted efforts to boost
college completion.
But graduation rates haven't
budged. That's
why states across the country
are watching
an effort in New York City that
promises to
more than double graduation
rates at community
colleges.
Hari Sreenivasan went to the
Bronx to see
how the city's community
colleges plan to
do it.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Karla Ayala is
in her last
semester at Bronx Community
College. If everything
goes as planned, she will earn
her associate's
degree from the City University
of New York
campus in five semesters, or
about two years.
Only 20 percent of community
college students
complete a degree or certificate
within three
years of enrollment. Ayala has
done it despite
having the types of
responsibilities that
derail hundreds of thousands of
students every
year.
KARLA AYALA, Student: College is
stressful,
and then on top of it having an
outside life,
I have kids, I'm married, I
don't have a full-time
job, but yet I have a
responsibility part-time
at school.
HARI SREENIVASAN: She's stayed
on track with
the help of Accelerated Study in
Associate
Programs, or ASAP, The City
University of
New York created the wrap-around
support program
for full-time students on some
of its seven
community college campuses in
2007.
KARLA AYALA: I did a semester
without being
in ASAP, and it was a little
hard, because
I was -- in a sense, I was lost.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Ayala is up at
6:00 to get
the kids ready for school and
out the door
by 7:30, when her husband is
already at work.
ASAP pays for any tuition not
covered by scholarships,
which meant $2,600 a semester
for Ayala.
Students also get a stipend for
textbooks.
Commuting costs in a city like
New York can
add up and become a hurdle. ASAP
provides
free monthly MetroCards for city
buses and
trains, which normally cost
$116. Class schedules
that change every semester can
derail students
who have to work or care for
family. ASAP
students take blocks of classes
that bring
them to campus at the same time
every day.
That means Ayala knows she can
get home to
pick the kids up from school.
But the most important support
has come from
her adviser.
KARLA AYALA: We have established
a relationship
where she knows, like, OK,
Karla, what's going
on with this class? And I had a
class where
I was struggling, and she
definitely, you
know, gave me the pep talk.
She's like, you
got to do it. I'm not going to
take you out
of the class. You're going to
have to work
hard in your tutoring.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The data
points to success
stories beyond Ayala. Only 17
percent of CUNY's
full-time community college
students get a
degree in three years. For ASAP
students,
the rate is 57 percent. In the
fall, New York
City leaders pledged an
additional $42 million
to expand the program from 7,500
students
this year to 25,000 by 2018.
The goal is to raise the system
wide graduation
rate to 50 percent or higher for
full-time
students.
JAMES MILLIKEN, Chancellor, City
University
of New York: At community
colleges, and particularly
at urban community colleges
across the country,
the three-year graduation rate
is about 16
percent right now. And so you
could call that
a crisis.
HARI SREENIVASAN: CUNY's
chancellor James
Milliken:
JAMES MILLIKEN: The issue's not
all about
access. It's a big part of it.
We have to
be focused on the success of our
students,
getting them a degree.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Ayala's
adviser, Melanie
Robles, says turning the numbers
around takes
more than pointing students to
the right classes.
MELANIE ROBLES, City University
of New York:
I can work with a student on
their academics,
right? That's typical. But then
you also have
that moment where you're working
with a student
that is having difficulty at
home, so you're
coaching them on maybe how to
have a conversation
with a parent that maybe doesn't
want to assist
them any longer to take care of
their child
for them.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Javier Legasa
oversees ASAP
on the Bronx campus. He says
this intensive
support is possible because ASAP
advisers
only work with 150 students each
semester,
compared to 500 students for
each adviser
outside the program.
JAVIER LEGASA, City University
of New York:
Students need to feel that they
belong, that
this is their place, that we
welcome them.
And so having the sense of
connection with
staff members, with the other
students as
well, and the faculty who will
be teaching
them in class, this is a key
element.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And they're
tracking students'
progress closely.
JAVIER LEGASA: Sometimes, it can
be, OK, you
may have to withdraw from one of
the classes
so you can concentrate in
others. But, in
other cases, we will be just,
you know, do
some tutoring work, for example.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Somebody's
going to say,
listen, this is a ton of money.
Why don't
you just hand these people the
keys to a four-year
private institution if you're
going to invest
$80 million in 25,000 students?
JAMES MILLIKEN: The cost that's
invested in
a community college student may
be about $15,000.
And we're talking about now a
cost of an additional
$3,700 for the ASAP program
today.
Now, by the time we scale up to
25,000, it
may be $3,200. It may be lower.
The cost per
degree goes down. But if you
look at a lot
of the research that's been done
on educational
attainment levels, there are a
whole lot of
other social benefits, lower
demand on criminal
justice system, on social
welfare systems,
divorce rates.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Karla Ayala is
playing her
own part in the ASAP expansion.
In her part-time
job as a peer mentor, she runs
information
sessions like the one that
exposed her to
ASAP two years ago.
KARLA AYALA: So, it's like you
have this group
with the same mentality, and
you're bound
to be successful.
HARI SREENIVASAN: By 2018, CUNY
plans to enroll
nearly all 7,000 full-time
students at the
Bronx campus in ASAP.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Hari
Sreenivasan
in New York.
JUDY WOODRUFF: President Obama
designated
a new national monument in
Washington today.
The Belmont-Paul Women's
Equality National
Monument honors suffrage
fighters Alva Belmont
and Alice Paul. Since 1929, the
home has been
the headquarters of the National
Woman's Party.
Today, it becomes the first
national monument
to women's history.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
I want young boys and girls to
come here 10,
20, 100 years from now to know
that women
fought for equality. It wasn't
just given
to them. I want them to come
here and be astonished
that there was ever a time when
women could
not vote, that there was ever a
time where
a woman never sat in the Oval
Office.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And speaking of
the Oval Office,
that brings us to our latest
addition to the
"NewsHour" Bookshelf.
First, some background.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
Finally, fathers will be able to
say to their
daughters, you too can grow up
to be president.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Making her second
run, Hillary
Clinton is far from the first
woman to set
her eyes on the nation's highest
office. She
follows more than 200 American
women in that
quest.
Take the first, Victoria
Woodhull. The 32-year-old
launched her bid in 1870, almost
half-a-century
a group she organized. Woodhull
faced opposition
in the press, depicted as a
devil for supporting
the free love movement, by which
she meant
the freedom to marry, divorce
and bear children.
Almost 100 years later came
Maine's Margaret
Chase Smith, the first woman to
be elected
into the Senate in her own
right. At President
John F. Kennedy's last press
conference in
1963, he was asked about a
potential Smith
run.
JOHN F. KENNEDY, President of
the United States:
If I were a Republican
candidate, I would
not look forward to campaigning
against Margaret
Chase Smith to New Hampshire.
She is a very
formidable political figure.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Smith's bid for
the 1964 Republican
nomination was unsuccessful, but
her candidacy
turned out to be no laughing
matter. She became
the first woman to have her
named entered
into nomination at a major
party's convention.
MARGARET CHASE SMITH,
Presidential Candidate:
Women before me pioneered and
smoothed the
way for me to be the first women
to be elected
to both the House and the
Senate, and that
I should give back in return
that which had
been given to me.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Just four years
after Smith
gave back came Shirley Chisholm,
the first
black woman elected to Congress
in 1968, who
moved on to become the first
black woman to
run as a major-party candidate
for president
in 1972.
It was a short-lived, but
memorable bid, with
the slogan "Unbought and
Unbossed." She said
her campaign was for the
have-nots.
SHIRLEY CHISHOLM, Presidential
Candidate:
I am not the candidate of black
America, although
I am black and proud.
(APPLAUSE)
SHIRLEY CHISHOLM: I am not the
candidate of
the women's movement of this
country, although
I am a woman, and I am equally
proud of that.
(APPLAUSE)
SHIRLEY CHISHOLM: I am the
candidate of the
people of America.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
JUDY WOODRUFF: These women
helped set the
stage for Hillary Clinton.
Already, Clinton has made it
further than
any woman before her. Historian
Ellen Fitzpatrick
profiles the three who laid the
groundwork
for Clinton in her new book,
"The Highest
Glass Ceiling: Women's Quest for
the American
Presidency."
Ellen Fitzpatrick, welcome.
ELLEN FITZPATRICK, Author, "The
Highest Glass
Ceiling: Women's Quest for the
American Presidency":
Thank you. Nice to be here.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, there have
been a lot of
books written about women in
politics, but
you specifically wanted to focus
on women
going after the top job, the
presidency. Why?
ELLEN FITZPATRICK: Well, there
had been very
little, I noticed, done on this
subject. There
had been a lot of books about
the idea of
a woman president, but no
historian had really
looked at this question, no
academic historian.
It had sort of fallen between
the crevices.
On the one hand, there's so much
presidential
history. On the other hand,
there's a lot
of wonderful work in women's
history. But
women presidential candidates
had largely
been shunted aside.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Hillary Clinton,
right now,
she is the front-runner for the
Democratic
nomination.
But the three women you focus on
were women
who, because of the time they
went for the
presidency, it was a very
different environment.
Why did you pick these three?
And start with Victoria
Woodhull, 1872.
ELLEN FITZPATRICK: Remarkable.
She emerged during
Reconstruction, which was
the period after the Civil War
when many questions
were being raised about what
freedom and democracy
in America really meant. We had
just fought
this brutal and bloody Civil
War, and in the
aftermath of it, there were four
million slaves
emancipated and new
constitutional amendments
written to confer new rights on
African-Americans.
In that moment, the suffrage
movement began
to make its claim that women
should be included
in these new liberties, that
women's voting
rights should be established.
And Victoria
Woodhull emerged in the middle
of that debate
and said: Why not run for the
office itself?
I can embody the cause of
women's equality.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And then it was
almost another
100 years before another woman
you look at
-- that was Margaret Chase Smith
-- had been
the senator from the state of
Maine -- she
was a Republican -- went for the
presidency.
But she was also facing very,
very tough odds.
ELLEN FITZPATRICK: What was
extraordinary
was to find out, in 1964, the
kinds of things
said about Margaret Chase Smith,
who arguably
was really the best prepared of
any woman
who had run, certainly to that
point, were
actually more sexist than what
was being said
about Victoria Woodhull in 1870.
She was depicted as, on the one
hand, she
had been greatly admired. As
soon as she announced
her bid for the presidency, she
was depicted
as menopausal, addled, not
really up to the
responsibility.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And then, just a
few years
later, Shirley Chisholm, who ran
for president
in the early 1970s, first
African-American
woman elected to Congress. So,
she jumped
that hurdle, but the presidency
was something
else altogether.
ELLEN FITZPATRICK: Right.
She was on the national stage
from the moment
of her election, and she was a
vociferous
critic of the Nixon
administration. She got
a lot of press. She was
well-known. But she
too was really ridiculed when
she announced
her bid for the presidency in
1972, but she
stuck with it and went all the
way to the
convention.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What do you draw
from all of
this, Ellen Fitzpatrick, in
terms of lessons
for Hillary Clinton this year or
any other
woman who wants to be president?
ELLEN FITZPATRICK: Well, I think
the most
striking thing that we're seeing
in contemporary
politics is that now, in Hillary
Clinton,
there is a woman candidate who
has overcome
the biggest obstacles in the way
of the women
that preceded her, but there is
no failure
like success in this case,
because she has
been able to raise a lot of
money.
That sunk every previous
candidate. She has
strong support from her party.
Very few women
have been able to get that. A
high national
profile. And she is widely seen,
because of
her -- secretary of state, as
capable in foreign
affairs.
So, she's overcome these
prejudices, but she's
now seen as establishment.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Some would say,
looking at
the polls, that the main
obstacles she faces
don't have to do with gender.
They have to
do whether it's the controversy
over the e-mails
or people say they don't trust
her.
ELLEN FITZPATRICK: Right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How do you read
that?
ELLEN FITZPATRICK: The way I
read it is that
a lot of Americans will say
today that they're
happy to vote for a woman
president, and they're
even enthusiastic about that.
That's a huge reversal from the
early 20th
century. But they often will
say, I just don't
like that woman. And I think
that the way
that I read it is that it's hard
to imagine
anyone overcoming all these
obstacles and
also having this likability,
universal likability
factor that some seem to be
looking for.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What about the
fact, Ellen
Fitzpatrick, that, in the United
States, we
elected an African-American
president before
we may elect a woman president?
ELLEN FITZPATRICK: Well, that
was an important
moment in overcoming a long,
obviously, and
torturous racial history in the
United States
of tremendous inequality in
political life.
But the changes that occurred in
the Democratic
Party and the Republican Party
in the 1970s
created the opening for women
and African-Americans
to move up in the party system,
and, hence,
Barack Obama could emerge and
Hillary Clinton
as well.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, women should
take away
from this book that a woman will
one day be
elected president, or not?
ELLEN FITZPATRICK: Well, but not
easily.
And I think that it's important
to know the
history to really appreciate
what the stakes
are.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Ellen
Fitzpatrick, a great
book, "The Highest Glass
Ceiling: Women's
Quest for the American
Presidency."
Thank you so much.
ELLEN FITZPATRICK: Thank you,
Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In a rural
Nebraska village
of less than 200 people, a local
artist is
attempting to get drivers
passing through
to stop and spend a little money
locally,
while at the same time doubling
the town's
population.
From PBS member station NET,
Nebraska Education
Television, Mike Tobias
explains.
MIKE TOBIAS: There's Ralph
Hodson, little
Audrey, Ralph and Hank, the
friendly villagers
of Taylor, old-fashioned, kind
of stoic folks,
a little stiff, wooden,
actually.
MARAH SANDOZ, Artist: I want as
many wooden
people as there are actual
people in Taylor,
which is only 182. I can do it.
MIKE TOBIAS: Marah Sandoz is one
of the actual
people, and creator of the
wooden ones.
A couple decades ago, she got
involved with
a local economic development
group brainstorming
about ways to help the fading
village.
MARAH SANDOZ: What can we do to
stop the traffic?
What can we create for people to
see?
And so we went back to, OK, what
do we have?
We have a couple really cool
historic buildings.
Let's go back to that era and
let's recreate
what was when this town was
booming, when
this town was bustling.
MIKE TOBIAS: It became Sandoz's
project, a
self-described, self-trained
artist with experience
using wood and paint. She
hatched the idea
of life-sized plywood cutouts
depicting people
who might have lived in the
village between
1890 and 1920, when Taylor had
twice as many
people as today.
The first villagers arrived in
2003, Herbert
and Alice, near the historic,
now unused Pavilion
Hotel.
MARAH SANDOZ: People thought
they were fun.
They were different. People said
that they
had to stop and wait because
they thought
that the people wanted top cross
the street.
They wave at them. It created a
lot of local
chatter.
MIKE TOBIAS: The villager
population has since
grown to about 100 of the
cutouts. Sandoz
does most of the work, with a
little help
from family and locals. Location
is often
a starting point for the artist.
MARAH SANDOZ: So, a lot of my
ideas come from
seeing a spot. I tend to see
canvases in the
community, what would have been
happening
there in 1910.
MIKE TOBIAS: The villagers
caused a pair of
westbound travelers to stop.
MAN: Well, first reaction, we
thought it was
real, you know, it was real,
just kind of
somebody standing there, you
know?
MAN: And it has kind of an
inviting look to
it, you know? And it makes you
want to find
out more about it. So, we're --
actually,
we're thrilled that we stopped
here and find
out this is where they're being
made and a
little bit about the villagers,
as they call
them.
MIKE TOBIAS: Right now, there's
only so much
revenue the villagers can
generate for Taylor,
because there are only a handful
of places
to spend money in the only town
in one of
Nebraska's least populated
counties.
And that population has been
declining for
decades. Sandoz believes the
villagers project
can change that.
MARAH SANDOZ: We're creating a
really positive
climate for antique and retro
stuff, and so
will see if we can get some
other little businesses
around the square that can fill
those tourism
niches.
MIKE TOBIAS: For now, Sandoz
will do her part
by creating more villagers, six
a year, until
there's enough wooden people to
symbolically
double the town's population,
all with the
hope that real people will start
coming to
Taylor, instead of leaving.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Mike
Tobias in
Taylor, Nebraska.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally tonight,
just in time
for this primary season, an
essay on political
rhetoric.
Barton Swaim was the chief --
was the speechwriter
for former South Carolina
Governor Mark Sanford.
Swaim believes that perhaps the
best solution
to improving political speech is
for politicians
to just say less.
BARTON SWAIM, Speechwriter: It's
easy to dislike
politicians, especially when we
hear them
speak.
They cram their speeches with
wonkish hooey
and hedge their statements with
so many qualifiers
that you're sometimes left
unsure what those
statements even mean.
I used to work for a politician
as a speechwriter,
and I confess I came up with
fair amount of
verbal rubbish in my day. But
let's give our
politicians a break. We expect
them to speak
far too often, about far too
many subjects.
Think of the president. A
half-century ago,
the president spoke only rarely
in public,
once a week maybe. Now he speaks
in public
settings all week long,
sometimes several
times in a single day, to all
sorts of gatherings
on a vast range of topics.
It's not natural to orate that
often. You
run out of interesting things to
say. And,
to make it worse, your every
utterance is
scrutinized by reporters and
political adversaries
for anything offensive or
controversial.
So, what are politicians
supposed to do? They
have to speak all the time, but
without saying
anything that might cause
trouble. They have
no choice, really, but to
generate reams of
semi-meaningless verbiage.
You know what it sounds like.
You have heard
politicians droning on about the
American
exceptionalism...
SEN. TED CRUZ (R-TX),
Presidential Candidate:
Exceptionalism that has made
this nation a
clarion voice for freedom in the
world.
BARTON SWAIM: About how we can
build an...
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
Economy where hard work is
rewarded.
BARTON SWAIM: ... economy where
hard work
is rewarded,
About how we're going to give
our kids and
grandkids the future they
deserve.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
Give our kids and grandkids the
future they
deserve.
BARTON SWAIM: About how good
things happen
when America is engaged with
friends and allies.
JEB BUSH (R), Former Florida
Governor: Alert
to danger, resolved to deal with
threats before
they become catastrophes.
BARTON SWAIM: You have heard
these phrases,
sometimes many of them strung
together all
at once, and concluded that you
don't know
what any of it meant.
Of course, empty verbosity will
always be
a part of democratic politics.
But can we
lower the supply of it, even by
a little?
Maybe we can by asking our
politicians to
speak less often and about fewer
things.
The politician I worked for
spoke at a dizzying
array of events every week,
ground-breakings,
ribbon-cuttings, awards
ceremonies, industry
group gatherings, and many
others. He was
invited to speak at these events
chiefly because
he was the governor, not because
he had some
special insight to impart.
In most cases, it served no
useful purpose
for him to be there at all. We
can't stop
politicians from speaking so
much. There's
the First Amendment. But maybe
we could stop
inviting them to speak so
frequently.
Consider, for example, a
moratorium on elected
officials addressing graduation
ceremonies.
My guess is that most
politicians would enjoy
not speaking so often. Some of
them like the
sound of their own voice, for
sure. But many
of them realize that, if you
want to be listened
to, the best thing to do is keep
quiet until
you have got something to say.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we would miss
them if they
spoke less.
You can watch more of our essays
on our Web
site. That's PBS.org/NewsHour.
Also online, thanks to greats
like Billie
Jean King, tennis has been
recognized as a
leader in addressing the wage
gap in professional
sports, but gender equality
among athletes
goes beyond the money. You can
read more on
what tennis gets right and what
more could
be done.
And children's book author
Beverly Cleary
turns 100 today. We have
compiled seven things
you may not have known about the
woman who
created the beloved characters
Ramona Quimby
and Henry Huggins.
All that and more is on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
Tomorrow, we will talk to
Internet entrepreneur
Sean Parker about his
foundation's push for
new cancer research.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.